349812555

Predicting Customer Churn in the Internet Service Provider Industry of
Developing Nations: A Single, Explanatory Case Study of Trinidad and Tobago
Chapter · March 2021
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-69717-4_77

CITATIONS

READS

0

797

2 authors:
Lackeshwar Bachan

Tarek Gaber

University of Liverpool

University of Salford

1 PUBLICATION 0 CITATIONS

98 PUBLICATIONS 1,705 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Phishing Detection View project

Face Recognition Using Machine Learning: Special Issue at [Electronics] View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Tarek Gaber on 09 June 2021.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

PREDICTING CUSTOMER CHURN IN THE
INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDER INDUSTRY OF
DEVELOPING NATIONS: A SINGLE,
EXPLANATORY CASE STUDY OF TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO
Lackeshwar Bachan
University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, United Kingdom
lackeshwar.bachan@online.liverpool.ac.uk

Tarek Gaber
Faculty of Computers & Informatics
Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.
Member at SRGE Research Group (www.egyptscience.net)
tmgaber@gmail.com

Abstract. Customer churn in the telecommunications industry is a problem of
great concern to companies. The high cost involved in acquiring new customers
has shifted the telecoms sector's focus on retaining new customers. With an
average churn rate of 1.9%, the ability to predict accurately when a customer
might churn has become an asset to telecommunications companies. This
research aims to find a subtle method of predicting customer churn by applying
machine learning algorithms - Decision Tree, Logistic Regression, and Support
Vector Machine – to a dataset and evaluate how they stack up against each other
in determining customer churn. The dataset provided for this research comes
from Amplia Communications Limited, a major ISP in Trinidad and Tobago.
Python is used to develop the IT artifact in the research. The dataset is preprocess
using label-encoding, one-hot encoding, and Pearson correlation is used for
feature selection. The processed dataset is then normalized and split into 70% /
30% for training and testing, respectively. Using the evaluation metrics of
Accuracy, AUC, and F1 score, the Decision Tree model with values of 89.5%,
81.9%, and 86.9% respectively outperformed the other two machine learning
models. In conclusion, the decision tree model would be the best suited for
predicting customer churn from the results.
Keywords: Predictive analytics · Customer Churn · Machine learning · Support
vector machine (SVM) · Decision tree (DT) · Logistic Regression (LR)

3

1

Introduction

Customer churn is an always present factor in any service-related industry, with each
sector having its unique methods and techniques to deal with this event [1]. In the
telecoms sector, customer churn is defined as the event when a customer is no longer
interested in a company’s services and wishes to terminate said service. Customer churn
is a rapidly growing issue in the telecoms section. ISP has a more reactive approach to
customer churn, which, in most cases, is too late to save the customer [2]. The cost of
acquiring new customers has shifted the telecoms sector's focus to ensure that their
subscriber base retention of new customers is optimal.
There is a gap in the ISPs of Trinidad and Tobago between understanding their
customer base and the various issues they face [3]. The internet service providers (ISP)
of the country, however, are faced with unique customer churn issues. ISP traditional
approach to customer churn, is reactive only when a customer has informed the ISP of
their decision to terminate the service would the retention team try to identify the
customer issues and prevent churning [2]. The machine learning model will address
these limitations by using more localized data and broader metrics to give a greater
model accuracy would allow the ISP to take a proactive approach to address the
customer issue, may it be specific to that customer or a more significant problem.
This paper aims to demonstrate the use of Decision Tree, Logistic Regression and
Support Vector Machine algorithms applied to the dataset, and compare that which
classifiers have better performance using various measures, like accuracy, AUC, and
F1-score, confusion matrix in the prediction customer churn. Moreover, the research
aims to create a model using machine learning that would apply specifically to the
Trinidad and Tobago ISP industry to predict at-risk customers and their issues. This
model would allow the ISP industry to improve its customer experience and overall
service level significantly. Using more localized data and broader metrics to give a
greater model accuracy would allow the ISP to take a proactive approach to address the
customer issue, may it be specific to that customer or a more significant problem [4].
The remaining paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2 discusses related work in this
field. The experimental methodology is presented in Sect. 3. Section 4 comparative
analysis of the machine learning classifiers. At last, Sect. 5 concludes the paper.

2

Literature Review

Research conducted by [5] has demonstrated that mobile telecommunication has
become the most dominant mode of communication in the last two decades. This is not
only being witnessed in developed countries but also this mode has revolutionized
communication in developing countries. In developing countries, telecommunication
entities are competing to acquire and retain clients. Whereas in developed countries,
the markets have reached a saturation point where new clients or lost clients are worn
by other competitors. In order to protect consumer rights, various regulations have been
enacted and implemented by various jurisdictions. Regulations have been accompanied
by standardizing mobile telecommunications, which has enabled customers to shift

3

from one service provider to the other. This has led to the emergence of a very fluid
telecommunication market.
According to [6], it is quite expensive to acquire new clients; therefore, what most
internet service providers have been implementing is shifting attention to customer
retention instead of customer acquisition. This has accelerated the adoption of churn
prediction models, which has become a prevalent tool for Business intelligence
applications whose goal is to identify customer churn rates and the correlation between
churn features and shift to competitors.
[7] used a cluster analysis technique to investigate mobile users churn with Large
scale telecommunication companies in Jordan. [7] used a dataset obtained from 700
surveys. By employing the k-means cluster technique, he was able to showcase the
correlation between customer satisfaction and customer churn. The research leveraged
on the “Elbow rule” to get insights into cluster k numbers, whereas the ward Method
adapted as the algorithm to minimize within-cluster differences. This methodology was
able to generate a total of 3 clusters. In the analysis, gender, education, mobile network
service providers, age, tenure, and residence were used as the demographic factors. The
insight derived from the research demonstrated the varied results between the
independent variables. The k-means cluster technique demonstrated that customers
were not willing to churn their current service provider because of any inconvenience
caused. For this paper, K-means will not be adapted. However, this literature blends
well with the objective of Decision trees and Logistic regressions, which feed on binary
data in their implementation [7].
For this particular literal work, [8] focused on customer churn prediction with little
emphasis on a lot of historical data due to many factors. They used a Just in time across
the company model to complement their research, which served as a practical
alternative. This was achieved by obtaining publicly listed datasets fed to Support
Vector Machines as the base classifier tool. Just in Time model works by using data
from mature companies as the training data and data from newly established companies
as the validation test. Results from the model showed that the Just In Time model had
a 55.33% accuracy. This would be ideal for the Trinidad and Tobago research as the
test subject has little historical data to do with the features that affect customer churn.
[9] applied a deep learning stacked autoencoder network model along with Logistic
regression for their churn prediction. They used data from 400,000 client’s behavioral
records. 80% of the data formed the training dataset as the rest was used as the test data
set. Their model used a Stacked Autoencoder Network popularly known as SAE,
renowned as a classical unsupervised machine learning model. This model, SAE, is
preferred if the research has large datasets, reduces data dimensions, and when the data
has few labels. From the models' implementation, the output is a logistic regression
classification, which can classify whether a customer has churned or not churned. The
output from the model is then evaluated by using a confusion matrix to get results
precision-recall. An F1 score was also used to measure precision and recall balance.
Further evaluation demonstrated that the SAE model had an accuracy of 73.5%, which
was greater than the Logistic Regression accuracy of 71.8%. The researchers identified
the model’s challenge and recommended that it be optimized by continuously adjusting

3

the parameters. This dissertation will apply both the SVM and Logistic Regression
models [9].
Research done by [10] focus on the use of logistic regression model to solve the
problem of customer churn in telecommunications companies. Churn as described in
the paper is when an individual of the telecommunications company decides to opt out
on their service with said ISP. Is churn lost is a cost to the telecommunications company
from monthly rental cost to cost of collection of equipment. To address is problem the
researchers acquired a dataset which contain various customer information such as
demographic data, account information, customer service information etc. This dataset
if firstly pre-processed to address any missing data, attributes having NA’s, incorrect
data types or data format. Once this pre-processing is done feature selection is started.
Selecting the right features leads to better accuracy and model execution. The
researchers’ approach to this is using exploratory data analysis using visualization and
statistical tests. They used the chi-square test for categorical data and z-test for
continuous data. Each feature is selected based on a level of confidence. Once
completed the dataset is passed through the LR model and evaluated based on the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC). The LR had an Area under the curve value
of 0.83 for a threshold of 0.5.
In summary there is a lot of work done using different models to predict customer
churn. Some like the work done by [8] and [9] did not produce favorable results that
would allow for a model to be used in a real-world environment. Some limitations were
the quality and quantity of the dataset. Other work like that of [10] produced excellent
results by its focus was limited to a singular machine learning model.
This study builds on the research done already by ensuring the dataset is
preprocessed to remove all anomalies and utilized techniques such as one-hot encoding
and converting categorical features to numerical. Pearson Correlation would be used
for feature selection before the finalized dataset is applied to the three machine learning
models. Area under the curve in conjunction with F1 score will be used as an evaluation
metric as it allows for the better accuracy.

3

Methodology

In this section, we briefly explain the steps of the churn prediction methodologies.
Generally, in applying machine learning on the ISP dataset, there are four steps need to
be followed:
1) Data Preparation – In this stage the raw data is cleaned by correcting any
formatting issues, corrections to the data and combining of the data to enrich
its value.
2) Data Pre-processing – In this stage the data in the dataset is modify so that it
meets the requirements to be applied to the models. The dataset is also split
into training and testing 70/30 ratio.
3) Model Construction – At this stage the three models’ various parameters are
selected, and the dataset applied.

3

4) Prediction Accuracy – In this final stage of the process the models are
evaluated and compared against each other to see who has the better predictive
power.
Fig 1 shows the flow chart of churn prediction model for this study.

Fig. 1. Methodology Pipeline

3.1

Decision Tree

This model uses tree structures analogy to generate data classification rules. Decision
trees can perform both classification and regression analysis. In classification, decision
trees are able to generate nodes that act as IF statements, which are able to continuously
divide the data and adding nodes to already divided data. This is done iteratively until
each branch's accuracy does not improve, the results in a leaf which ends up giving us
the output of the remaining dataset in the branch. This algorithm is analogous to a tree's
physical structure, and it can classify a dataset based on those physical attributes. The
advantages of Decision trees are that they can do both classification and regression
analysis. In addition to this, they are robust to the extent that they can handle both
categorical and numerical data. This algorithm can classify features and their effects to
churn by continuously adding nodes on the classified data. If the accuracy is no longer
improving, then the algorithm will give results of the leaves as the outputs of the
datasets remaining in the branch [11].
3.2

Logistic Regression

According to [12], Logistic regression belongs to a modelling class called the
generalized linear model. The main objective of these generalized linear models for
binary dependent variables is to estimate regression equations that relate the output
target of the dependent variable known as the y variable to predicator variables globally
represented by the x variable [13]. The most common approach in regression is to model
the independent variable as a function of independent variables. The drawback of linear
regression is that it is impossible to predict outputs outside the 1-0 permissible range.
To have a robust, we also need to loop in an algorithm that can give nonlinear
predictions, mostly when we expect binary outputs. This project has the objective of

3

predicting customer churn rate, either churn (1), Not churn (0). This is where logistic
regression comes in handy.
3.3

Support Vector Machine (SVM)

This technique classifies data by computing an optimized hyperplane that classifies
different classes. A 2-Dimensional space shows the hyperplane as a simple line, which
separates different labels such that when a new dataset is fed into the model. Various
features can fall on either side of the line. Support Vector Machine algorithm can
classify data by computing an optimal hyperplane, which is used to categorize different
classes. The algorithm can separate features that contribute to churn rates and those that
do not promote churning [14]. This research will utilize the Radial basis function, also
called the Gaussian kernel.
3.4

Pearson Correlation

This is a method that shows a linear relationship between various attributes. In Machine
learning, this linear relationship can be visualized as a matrix that can show the
relationship between an attribute and itself or/and relationships between various
attributes. From Pearson correlation coefficients, we can know which attributes have
strong correlations [15]. In this case, before any modeling is done, we either add them
together or drop one of the attributes as both of them will in the dataset not affect the
outcome of the results. Pearson correlation is a unique algorithm that can produce
coefficients, range from -1 to 1. If the correlation between the target output and the
variable is closer to 0, then the conclusion is that the target output does not correlate
with the attribute. A positive value that leans towards 1 shows a strong positive
correlation [16].
3.5

Performance Measures

The performance of the three models was evaluated using Accuracy, F1 score which is
seen in the classification report and Area under the Curve.
Accuracy as defined by the equation below is measured by the ratio of correct
predictions to the total number of cases evaluated [17]. Thus, the higher the accurate
the result.
ACC = (TP + TN) / (TP + TN + FP + FN)
F1 score as defined by the equation below is the weighted harmonic mean of recall and
precision, which gives 1 the best score and 0 the worst score [17].
F1 = 2 TP / (2TP + FP + FN)
It is important to note that F1 scores will always be lower than accuracy measures
because they include both recall and precision in their computation. Standard practice
dictates that F1 scores should be used when comparing classifier models and not as a
global accuracy criterion [18].
AUC measures the entire two-dimensional area underneath the entire ROC curve. AUC
provides an aggregate measure of performance across all possible classification

3

thresholds. AUC ranges in value from 0 to 1. A model whose predictions are 100%
wrong has an AUC of 0.0; one whose predictions are 100% correct has an AUC of 1.0.

4

Experiment Results and Discussion

4.1

Dataset

The Machine learning algorithms were evaluated using the Internet service provider
dataset, which consisted of 16 attributes and 31728 entities with 27166 as non-churners
and 4562 churners. Details of attribute are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. ISP customer churn attribute list

Attributes
customerID
tenure
customerGroup
internetService
tvService
voiceService
secureService
technicalTickets

nontechnicalTickets

truckRolls
paperlessBilling
customersBills
paymentsReceived
monthlyCharges
outstandingBalance
Churn

Description
unique ID of a customer.
How many months the customer has/had
the service.
The category the Fiber to the Home
(FTTH) customer belongs.
If the customer has internet service.
If the customer has tv service
If the customer has VoIP service.
If the customer has home alarm
monitoring service
Number of tickets raised by the
customer due to a technical service
issue, ranging from WIFI issues,
Ethernet cable issues, fiber breaks,
damage equipment etc.
Number of tickets raised by the
customer due to a non-technical issue,
ranging from billing issues, account
queries, product queries, etc
Number of times a technician visited the
customer for a repair issue.
If customer receives their bill via email.
Number of bills customer receives
Number of payments made by customer.
Cost of customer monthly services.
Total outstanding amount owed by the
customer.
If the customer churned

3

4.2

Data Pre-processing

There were no anomalies found in the dataset with respect to missing data and incorrect
format. A few outliers were found in the box and whiskers plot of monthlycharges vs.
churn. On closer examination of these data points, it was found that these were
customers taking very high-end packages, so were left in the dataset. The next step was
the conversion of the categorical attributes to numerical values which is all yes/no
values to No = 0 and Yes = 1. One hot encoding is done on the customerGroup attribute.
Lastly the selection of attributes is done using the standard correlation function method
called ‘Pearson Correlation Coefficient’ with results shown in Fig 2. As we can see
from the Pearson correlation heat map, Employee and Residential_IPTV have a strong
negative correlation. As such, we can remove one of these features. In our dataset, we
will drop the Employee feature.

Fig. 2. Visualization of Pearson Correlation

4.3

Results and discussion

The first model tested in keeping with the objectives of this research is the Decision
Tree. We first created the Decision Tree using the following features, the max_depth
parameter is set to 4, and the criterion is set to entropy. We then trained the model using
the training set and then applied the test set. Table 2 shows the evaluation of the decision
tree after its implementation, with the decision tree algorithm, we have an accuracy of
89.5% with Area under the curve of 81.9% with an F1-score of 86.9 %.

3

The second model tested was the Logistic Regression model. Its aim is to evaluate the
model performance so it can be compared to the other models. It was created using the
C parameter, which represents the inverse regularization parameter, which is set to 0.01
and solver set to liblinear. Table 2 shows that with the Logistic Regression algorithm,
we have an accuracy of 88.2%, an Area under the curve of 78.2% with a F1-score of
84.7%. The final model, evaluated as outlined in the research objectives, is the SVM.
The probability parameter is set to True and the Kernel used is RBF. Table 2 shows that
with the Support Vector Machine algorithm, we have an accuracy of 89.9%, An Area
under the curve of 79.4% with an F1-score of 87.6%.
Table 2. Model Evaluation's comparative analysis

Model

Accuracy

AUC

F1 Score

Decision Tree

89.5%

81.9%

86.9%

Logistic Regression

88.2%

78.3%

84.7%

Support Vector Machine

89.9%

79.4%

87.6%

5

Conclusion

In this paper, using a dataset provided for this research comes from Amplia
Communications Limited, a major ISP in Trinidad and Tobago, the customer churn in
the telecommunication industry is investigated to gain insight whether machine
learning technique would help to the ISPs to predict the churn rate so they can deal the
problem early avoiding losing customers. Three distinct machine learning algorithms
were compared to see their predictive accuracy in determining whether a customer will
terminate their services with the organisation. It was observed that the Decision Tree
outperformed the Logistic Regression and edged out the Support Vector Machine due
to its better AUC of 81.9% but still high Accuracy of 89.5% and F1 score of 86.9%.
So, it can be concluded that the decision tree model would be the best suited for
predicting customer churn. A future work could be comparing the results of this study
with others from different countries to see whether the customers’ behavior differs from
country to another.