Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Forest Ecology and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/foreco

Within and between population phenotypic variation in growth vigor and
sensitivity to drought stress in five temperate tree species
Victor Fririon a, *, Hendrik Davi a, Sylvie Oddou-Muratorio a, b, François Lebourgeois c,
François Lefèvre a
a

INRAE, UR 629 Ecologie des Forêts Méditerranéennes (URFM), Domaine Saint Paul–Site Agroparc, 228, route de l’Aérodrome, 84000 Avignon, France
INRAE, UMR 1224 Ecologie Comportementale et Biologie des Populations de Poissons (ECOBIOP), Aquapôle, 173, Route de Saint-Jean-de-Luz, 64310 Saint-Pée-surNivelle, France
c
Université de Lorraine, AgroParisTech, INRAE, UMR 1434 Silva, 14, rue Girardet, 54000, Nancy, France
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Growth–climate relationships
Drought stress
Forest dynamics
Tree rings
Dendro-phenotypes
Plasticity

Within-population variation in individual tree growth and response to climate has an impact on forest dynamics,
resilience and adaptation to environmental change.
Combining dendrochronological analyses with a process-based ecophysiological model simulating drought
stress at the stand scale, we studied the phenotypic variation of two growth-related traits within 22 pure stands of
five contrasted tree species sampled in the RENECOFOR network over a wide range of ecological conditions.
First, we computed the annual stress level from soil, climate and stand inventory data. Second, we computed
individual sensitivity as the quantitative growth response to drought stress level and individual vigor as the
capacity to grow in favorable years relative to an average stand-level growth model. We analyzed withinpopulation variation and covariation of individual vigor and sensitivity, their temporal changes during stand
development, as well as the effect of environmental conditions on population-level means, variances and
correlation.
Our results show that within-population variances in sensitivity and vigor exceed the between-population
variances for all species. The populations located in more stressful environments, i.e., low summer precipita­
tion and extractable soil water, showed lower mean and variance of sensitivity, suggesting possible multiscale
adaptation at the population level and within populations. None of the environmental factors considered had an
effect on the average population vigor or on the within-population variance of vigor. We found a general positive
correlation between individual growth sensitivity and vigor in 17 out of 22 populations, potentially revealing a
growth performance trade-off. The correlation was more pronounced in low extractable soil water environments,
which may be related to a need for stressful conditions to reveal the trade-off or be the consequence of adaptive
processes, i.e., acclimation and selection.
If high within-population stand phenotypic variation in growth traits contributes to the resilience and adaptive
capacity of forests to climate change, a trade-off could represent a constraint on selection. We provide genetic
and environmental arguments supporting the hypothesis of a trade-off, then we highlight the importance of
integrating it into the management process, especially during selective thinning, to avoid indirectly increasing
population sensitivity by selecting the most vigorous trees.

1. Introduction
Climate change is associated with increasing drought stress in all
forest biomes around the world (Allen et al., 2010; Choat et al., 2012;
Allen et al., 2015), with a potentially major impact on their role as

carbon sinks (Ma et al., 2012; Anderegg et al., 2015). Drought stress
reduces tree growth (Lempereur et al., 2015) and photosynthesis (Cornic
& Massacci 1996), and when drought is intense and/or long, drought
stress can cause hydraulic failures and lead to defoliation and tree death
(Brodribb & Cochard 2009). Tree rings analysis is a widely recognized

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: victor.fririon@inrae.fr (V. Fririon), hendrik.davi@inrae.fr (H. Davi), sylvie.muratorio@inrae.fr (S. Oddou-Muratorio), francois.lebourgeois@
agroparistech.fr (F. Lebourgeois), francois.lefevre.2@inrae.fr (F. Lefèvre).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2022.120754
Received 20 January 2022; Received in revised form 12 December 2022; Accepted 22 December 2022
Available online 12 January 2023
0378-1127/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/).

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

approach to assess the effect of climate on tree growth (Fritts, 1971,
Cook, 1985, Giguère-Croteau et al., 2019) and detect early-warning
signs of mortality (Cailleret et al., 2019). Dendroecological approaches
proved successful in investigating the impact of drought stress on the
average radial growth of stands or cohorts and highlighting important
variations in this impact with life history traits (DeSoto et al., 2020),
social status (Mérian & Lebourgeois, 2011), stand structure and
geographical location within the species distribution range (Camarero
2021). Moreover, introducing the interindividual variability in treering–climate relationships allows for a more in-depth assessment of the
effect of climate on stand growth that could improve the quality of
ecological inferences (Carrer et al., 2011).
Within-population interindividual phenotypic variation of growth
results from the combination of extrinsic factors, such as resource
availability and competition, and intrinsic factors, such as genotype,
acclimation, microsite, age, size and social status (Aranda et al., 2010;
Corcuera et al., 2011). In the context of climate change, two growth
traits are useful to distinguish: the sensitivity to drought stress, i.e. the
response of tree growth to stress level, and the growth potential, here­
inafter referred to as vigor. Sensitivity and vigor both contribute to tree
size and therefore to competitive and possibly reproductive perfor­
mances. In comparison to the precisely defined drought sensitivity and
its extensive use in ecophysiological and dendrometrical studies, vigor
has been defined more loosely and mainly used in applied genetic
studies with little consideration of stand dynamics effects. Withinpopulation variation and covariation of individual vigor and sensi­
tivity to drought are factors of resilience in the face of climate change.
Phenotypic variations in drought tolerance may buffer the short-term
impacts of drought on the ecological functions of forests (Bréda et al.,
2006; Aitken et al., 2008; Grady et al., 2011; Alfaro et al., 2014). In the
long term, within-population variance and correlations of growth traits
determine their take on selection and the evolutionary potential of
populations. On different time scales, acclimation and selection are
likely to jointly influence the sensitivity and vigor of the populations as
well as the phenotypic variation, with both processes being subject to
local environmental constraints. Previous works revealed the genetic
basis of within-population variation for sensitivity to climate (Liepe
2014; Bansal et al., 2015; Depardieu et al., 2020).
Among tree populations, a genetic trade-off between vigor and
sensitivity to climate has been reported in multisite common garden
experiments: those populations that grow better in favorable sites
generally grow less than others in stressful conditions (e.g., Pinus con­
torta and P. sylvestris in Rehfeldt et al., 2001; 2002). The genetic
component of this trade-off may result from a balancing selection pro­
cess for contrasting ecological strategies, such as a water economy
strategy in which plants maintain low growth rates and low rates of gas
exchange during droughts or a water uptake strategy in which plants
have more rapid instant growth through higher rates of gas exchange
when water is available, allowing them to complete important biological
functions before drought onset (Arntz & Delph 2001). At the withinpopulation scale, a phenotypic trade-off between vigor and sensitivity
was observed in Abies alba by Nourtier et al., (2014) and in Cedrus
atlantica by Fallour-Rubio et al., (2009). In a Fagus sylvatica population
facing summer droughts, Bontemps et al., (2017) observed phenotypic
trade-offs in the phenology, growth dynamics and anatomy among trees
related to vigor and sensitivity. This trade-off can be due to environ­
mental variability: individuals with higher water resources are expected
to be more vigorous but also more sensitive to drought stress (Nourtier
et al., 2014; Cailleret et al., 2019). Within-population trade-offs may
also be under genetic control, which could explain the changes in cor­
relation observed between cohorts within a single Cedrus atlantica forest
(Fallour-Rubio et al., 2009).
Ring width data provide repeated growth measures over time, i.e.,
under different climates, of the trees that survived competition and
hazards until sampling. Hence, they are very valuable data for disen­
tangling individuals from environmental effects on growth vigor and

sensitivity in situ, which can be achieved by using an individual-based
growth analysis model that explicitly considers the factors of tree age,
size, social status, the overall site environment and an individual
random effect that captures the genetic and microsite effects (FallourRubio et al., 2009). Additionally, tree growth vigor and sensitivity to
drought stress need to be considered dynamic phenotypic traits (Peltier
& Ogle, 2020). Indeed, these traits are driven not only by static factors
such as tree genotype or microsite conditions but also by dynamically
changing factors such as tree age, size and social status (Cook, 1985;
Trouvé et al., 2014; Perin et al., 2017; Forrester, 2019; Peltier & Ogle
2020; Mašek et al., 2021). These individual features may change dras­
tically over the potential long lifespan of trees in relation to stand
development and forest management. To our knowledge, however, no
study to date has combined a growth analysis model at the tree scale
with a dynamic perspective of vigor and sensitivity.
Another challenge when investigating tree growth sensitivity to
environmental stress is to qualify and quantify the stress level. Some
approaches, such as the resistance, recovery and resilience indices
proposed by Lloret et al., (2011), bypass the quantitative level of stress
and focus on the temporal sequence of growth variation. In this way,
Depardieu et al., (2020) estimated within-population genetic variation
in Lloret indices based on common garden experiments. However, in
natural stands, this approach raises the question of comparability be­
tween individuals, sites and species, since the observed response is
specific to a given water stress level in a given background stress, both of
which are often not measured (Schwarz et al., 2020). Other den­
droecological studies explicitly consider the individual pedoclimatic
variables driving intra- and interannual variation in tree growth (e.g.,
Fritts, 1971, Mérian et al., 2011). As it can be challenging to generalize
the relation between tree-ring widths and any single pedoclimatic var­
iable, another related approach consists of using synthetic drought
indices, such as the Palmer drought severity index or standardized
precipitation evapotranspiration index (PDSI: Palmer, 1965; SPEI:
Vicente-Serrano et al., 2010). Such indices precisely account for the
environmental factors of stress but are irrespective of the physiological
reaction of the plant and neglect the crucial importance of soil proper­
ties, stand density and species functional traits, which may either
amplify or buffer drought stress. In other words, they may not appro­
priately inform the effective intensity and duration of drought stress
(Zang et al., 2020).
In this study, we combined dendrochronological analyses with an
ecophysiological process-based model assessing the drought stress level
and an individual-based growth model to investigate the phenotypic
variation in growth sensitivity and vigor. We took advantage of the
RENECOFOR dataset, an extensive tree-ring dataset that includes 61
pure stands of five temperate tree species, i.e., Fagus sylvatica, Pseu­
dotsuga menziesii, Pinus pinaster, Quercus petraea and Quercus robur,
sampled over a wide range of ecological conditions, thus covering a
broad range of climate–growth relationships that have been shown to
vary among species, stands and social cohorts (Lebourgeois et al., 2005,
Lebourgeois et al., 2010, Mérian et al., 2011; Mérian & Lebourgeois,
2011; Guillemot et al., 2015). More specifically, in this study, we sought
(1) to quantify the variance of growth sensitivity and vigor within forest
tree populations, (2) to assess the correlation between these traits and, in
particular, test for a possible trade-off, (3) to characterize the temporal
dynamics of variances and correlation within populations, and (4) to
identify pedoclimatic environmental factors that explain differences in
variances, correlation, and average values of growth sensitivity and
vigor among populations.
Here, we defined individual vigor as the growth performance in
favorable years, and sensitivity as the reaction norm of growth to stress
level. For both traits, we sought to capture an individual effect inde­
pendent of cofactors such as age or size. We hypothesize that genetic and
micro-environmental factors may jointly contribute to the observed
variation in sensitivity and vigor at the individual tree level. We consider
that phenotypic variation and covariation of growth sensitivity to
2

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

drought and vigor directly influence forest stand dynamics and forest
management choices and, therefore, interfere with selection through
size-dependent reproductive success (Greene & Johnson, 1994; Burczyk
et al., 1996), growth and survival (Caspersen et al., 2011; Bennett et al.,
2015).

(ESW) as follows:
ESW = D(1 − C)(θfc − θwilt)

(1)

where D is soil depth, C is the coarse element percentage, θwilt is hu­
midity at the wilting point and θfc is humidity at field capacity assessed
using soil texture data (Baize & Jabiol 1995; Supp. Table 1). The ESW
computed over the entire soil profile ranged from 19 to 351 mm among
populations.

2. Material and methods
2.1. Study area and species

2.2. Selected trees, ring-width measurements and analysis

Our study is based on the French permanent plot network for the
monitoring of forest ecosystems (RENECOFOR, part of the ICP Forests
Level II network, Lorenz 1995). We focused here on five contrasted
species (i.e., contrasted autecology, gymnosperm vs angiosperm, shade
tolerant vs intolerant, high vs low growth rate) sampled in 61 forest tree
populations managed in pure and even-aged stands: Fagus sylvatica L. (n
= 20 populations), Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirb.) Franco (n = 6), Pinus
pinaster Aiton (n = 7), Quercus petraea (Matt.) Liebl. (n = 19) and Quercus
robur L. (n = 9). Together, the five temperate species represent 43 % of
the French standing volume (IGN, 2021). The 61 populations were
located between 41◦ 45′ 08′ ’ and 50◦ 10′ 16′ ’N and between 3◦ 32′ 34′ ’ and
9◦ 12′ 23′ ’W (Fig. 1) and covered a wide range of bioclimatic conditions:
oceanic (n = 15 populations), semi-continental (n = 35), Mediterranean
(n = 2) and mountainous (n = 11).
Over the 1959–1994 period, the mean annual precipitation varied
from 647 to 1441 mm per year among populations. The mean minimum
and the mean maximum temperature ranged from 4.2 ◦ C to 10.1 ◦ C and
9.6 ◦ C to 17.3 ◦ C, respectively. The elevation ranged from 5 to 1400 m
above sea level, and the slope ranged from 0 to 55 %. The populations
sampled above an altitude of 500 m (n = 13) were mainly F. sylvatica and
P. menziesii. Conversely, P. pinaster, Q. robur, and Q. petraea were mostly
sampled on plains. We computed the extractable soil water for trees

We used tree coring data obtained in 1995 by Lebourgeois et al.,
(1997). Briefly, within each population, 23 to 30 dominant and
codominant trees were cored at breast height as close as possible to the
pith with an increment borer. Ring widths were measured with a ste­
reomicroscope connected to a microcomputer and the tree ring program
SAISIE (Becker, 1989) to the nearest 0.01 mm. Then, the individual ring
width series were cross-dated by detecting regional pointer years and
checked for erroneous dating (Lebourgeois et al., 2005).
Tree-ring widths generally show a pronounced trend to change with
tree size and age as well as with stand structure and competition (Trouvé
et al., 2014; Perin et al., 2017). In this study, to disentangle the effect of
climate on radial growth from the effect of other factors unrelated to
climate, we standardized the individual radial growth series using a 30year cubic smoothing spline with a 50 % frequency response cutoff
(Cook & Peters, 1981; Mérian & Lebourgeois, 2011). The transformation
from the original ring width to the ring width index (RWI) was as
follows:
RWI = Woriginal /Wtrend

(2)

where Woriginal is the original tree ring width and Wtrend is the ring width

Fig. 1. Geographical position of the 61 forest tree populations in the RENECOFOR network (ICP Forests Level II network) for the five species studied. The 22
populations selected for analysis are in red (see 2.4. Selection of populations and temporal intervals for analyses).
3

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

trend unrelated to climate identified by the spline function. The stan­
dardized individual series were averaged using a bi-weighted robust
mean to create stand tree-ring chronologies (Cook & Peters 1981).
All core data processing was undertaken using the Dendrochro­
nology Program Library (dplR; Bunn, 2008) in R version 3.6.2 (R
Development Core Team, 2019).

time series was less than the interval length of 21 years. The youngest
selected populations show only a few temporal intervals.
The growth response to drought stress may be masked by other bi­
otic, abiotic or anthropogenic disturbance factors. These factors may
differ among species and populations, making it difficult to disentangle
and quantify a posteriori (Galván et al., 2014). For these reasons, we
carried out a double selection of populations and temporal intervals and
retained only populations and intervals for which the growth response to
drought stress was directly observable. To do so, we selected pop­
ulations with a significant simple correlation between stand tree-ring
chronology and StressLvl over the whole period of observation (p <
0.05) and the temporal intervals of these populations with a significant
simple correlation between stand tree-ring chronology and StressLvl (p
< 0.05). For some populations (n = 14), the correlation between RWI
and StressLvl was not significant overall but significant for some tem­
poral intervals; we still eliminated them. This selection process also led
us to discard populations and intervals with low interannual drought
stress variability or for which water was not a factor limiting growth.
Among the 61 initial populations, 22 met the selection criteria and
were used for the analyses (Fig. 1): 11F. sylvatica populations (55 %),
3P. menziesii (50 %), 2P. pinaster (29 %), 3 Q. robur (33 %) and 3
Q. petraea (16 %). The geographical position of the 22 selected pop­
ulations is highlighted in Fig. 1. The climatic and pedological ranges of
the selected populations were close to those of the initial group: mean
annual rainfall ranged from 686 to 1422 mm among selected pop­
ulations; mean minimum and mean maximum temperature ranged from
5.6 ◦ C to 10.1 ◦ C and 11.9 ◦ C to 16.4 ◦ C, respectively; and extractable
soil water for trees ranged from 19 to 275 mm (Supp. Table 3). The
average population age in the selected temporal intervals varied be­
tween 13 and 183 (Supp. Table 3), which provided a contrasting pop­
ulation panel to analyze the variation of the studied traits.

2.3. Simulation of the edaphic drought stress level
An appropriate approach to quantify water stress is key for any type
of growth responses analysis as the drought index choice may strongly
influence the results (Van Loon et al. 2016). Raw climate data, as well as
the PDSI or SPEI index, are valuable indicators for the study of drought
on large scales but do not capture the intensity and duration of sitespecific soil water deficits (Zang et al. 2020). For these reasons, we
opted for an ecophysiological approach and exhaustivity quantified
water reserves and flux within each plot.
We used an ecophysiological process-based model (CASTANEA,
Dufrêne et al., 2005; Davi & Cailleret 2017) to simulate the annual
drought stress level relative to the soil water content experienced by
trees (StressLvl). We set the soil forcing variables (soil depth, texture,
coarse element percentage) using the plot soil values available in the
RENECOFOR dataset. We extracted the daily local climatic variables
(minimum, average and maximum temperatures; precipitation; wind
speed; average relative humidity; global radiation) from the objective
analysis module SAFRAN (Durand et al., 1993; Vidal et al., 2010) using
the closest grid points to the sampled populations (8 km grid resolution,
data available from 1959 to 2019). We initialized the dendrometric
variables, i.e., the number of trees per hectare (Nha) and the mean
diameter at breast height (DBH), using the stand dendrometric values
available in the RENECOFOR dataset. The parameters used for the
simulations and their values are given per species in Supplementary
Table 2.
We computed daily soil water content based on supply and demand
dynamics applied to soil moisture and as a function of soil forcing var­
iables. Campbell’s soil water retention equation (Campbell, 1974) was
used to predict the soil water potential (Ψsoil ) at a given volumetric water
content (θ) anchored at the saturated volumetric water content (θsat ) as:
( )− b
θ
Ψsoil = Ψe
(3)
θsat

2.5. Growth sensitivity to drought stress and vigor
We first estimated individual growth sensitivity and vigor within
each selected temporal interval and then computed mean values over
the selected intervals both at the individual tree level within each
population and at the population level.
2.5.1. Sensitivity estimation
For each tree of each population and at each selected temporal in­
terval T, we computed the regression coefficient between the ring width
index (RWI) and StressLvl simulated with CASTANEA as a quantitative
estimate of individual growth sensitivity to drought stress. We used the
following linear model to estimate individual sensitivity within each
selected temporal interval T (TSensi):

where Ψe is the air-entry matric potential and b is the soil water reten­
tion parameter. Ψe , b and θsat are strongly dependent on soil texture, and
we assessed their local values using soil texture data (Bonan, 2019;
Supp. Table 1).
Then, we used CASTANEA to integrate the annual soil water balance
(Dufrêne et al., 2005) in the form of a drought stress level indicator
(StressLvl) computed as a Palmer index measured in MPa (Palmer, 1965):
∑365
StressLvl =
Ψsoil
(4)
d=1

RWI i,n = β + TSensii × StressLvln + εi,n

(5)

where β is the intercept, TSensi is the temporal growth sensitivity to
drought stress, StressLvl is the annual drought stress simulated by the
process-based model, and ε is the between-year growth residual. Sub­
scripts i and n denote the individual and the year considered,
respectively.

where Ψsoil is the daily soil water potential of day d.
Thus, StressLvl integrates both the duration and intensity of the
annual water deficit. Subsequently, we used the StressLvl time series
simulated with CASTANEA to characterize the interannual variation in
drought stress in each studied population.

2.5.2. Vigor estimation
We computed individual vigor on a subset of the data corresponding
to the three years of lowest StressLvl within each selected 21-years in­
terval, as follows.
For pure even-aged stands, growth models, in which annual growth
is a function of DBH, had been developed for F. sylvatica (Dhôte 1991;
Dhôte & Le Moguedec 2012), Quercus sp. (Dhôte & Le Moguedec 2012;
Trouvé et al., 2014), P. menziesii (Deleuze et al., 2004; Trouvé et al.,
2014; Perin et al., 2017) and P. pinaster (Najar et al., 1999). In these
empirical models, the relationship between DBH and radial growth
dynamically evolves with stand structure. Here, for each of the three

2.4. Selection of populations and temporal intervals for analyses
To study the temporal dynamics of growth sensitivity and vigor, we
defined 21-year moving intervals slipped by one year. The 21-year
period represented a compromise between the temporal resolution
required to reveal variations in growth performance and the minimum
number of years required to observe sufficient annual variation in
StressLvl and growth. Here, we eliminated populations whose tree-ring
4

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

years, we assumed a linear relation of radial growth to DBH, and we
defined individual vigor as the deviation from this average growth
model, so vigor is independent of initial tree size. The populations of the
RENECOFOR network are, for the most part, managed in even-aged
stands (Mérian & Lebourgeois, 2011). However, few ones are likely to
deviate from even-aged structure. Therefore, we systematically added
age as an explanatory factor in the model. Thus, we analyzed the 3-year
subdataset within each interval with the following model:
Woriginali,n = β + τn + DBH + τn : DBH + Agei + TVigi + εi,n

Table 1
Glossary of the growth variables and associated variances and covariances
analyzed in this study.

(6)

where Woriginali,n is the original ring width of tree i in year n, β is the
intercept, τn is the effect of year n on growth, DBH is the effect of DBH,
τn : DBH is the interaction between DBH and year, Agei is the average age
of tree i in the considered interval, TVigi is the temporal vigor of tree i in
the considered interval, and εi,n is the residual variation for the ith tree in
the nth year. We used individual overbark DBH of year n (see Perin et al.,
2017), computed from the cumulative ring widths from the inside out
until year n. For the few populations deviating from even-aged, collin­
earity is possible between DBH and Age, but it does not affect the esti­
mation of vigor.
2.5.3. Sensitivity and vigor: From dynamic variables to intrinsic individual
and average population values
To characterize each individual by unique values, we computed the
individual intrinsic growth sensitivity (ISensi) and vigor (IVig) for each
individual of each population as the mean of its sensitivity and vigor
values over the selected intervals. We computed the average population
sensitivity (µSensi) by averaging the intrinsic sensitivity of individuals
and the average population vigor (µVig) by averaging individual growth
in favorable years. In addition, based on the average population sensi­
tivity and vigor, we computed the between-population variances for
each species and over all species as references to which we compared the
within-population variances. Finally, to quantify the correlation be­
tween growth sensitivity and vigor, we computed the Pearson correla­
tion coefficient between intrinsic vigor (IVig) and sensitivity (ISensi) for
each population and between temporal dynamic growth sensitivity
(TSensi) and vigor (TVig) for each interval. Table 1 lists all the growth
variables and their associated variances and correlations.
2.6. Statistical analysis between populations
We used mixed models to study the overall effects of local environ­
mental conditions (climate and soil) and average population age across
species and sites on population means, variances and correlations be­
tween growth sensitivity and vigor. For each of these variables, we built
a model with 1959–1994 average summer precipitation and maximum
temperature (in June, July, and August), extractable soil water and
average population age in the selected intervals as explanatory vari­
ables. We added the species as a random cofactor in the model. The
retained models were:
Yp = β + Prp + Tmaxp + ESW p +agep + spp + εp

Code

Unit

Description

Temporal vigor

TVig

cm

Intrinsic vigor

IVig

cm

Average population
vigor

µVig

cm

Variance of temporal
vigor
Within-population
variance of vigor
Within-species betweenpopulation variance
of vigor
Between-population
variance of vigor
Temporal sensitivity

var (TVig)

cm2

A temporal dynamic variable
quantifying the specific ability
of a tree to grow in favorable
years relative to an average
growth model
The averaged value of TVig over
temporal intervals
The average growth of
populations during favorable
years
The variance of temporal vigor

var (IVig)

cm2

The variance of intrinsic vigor

var (µVig|
sp)

2

cm

The within-species variance of
average population vigor

var (µVig)

cm2

TSensi

MPa

Intrinsic sensitivity

ISensi

MPa− 1

Average population
sensitivity

µSensi

MPa− 1

Variance of temporal
sensitivity
Within-population
variance of sensitivity
Within-species betweenpopulation variance
of sensitivity
Between-population
variance of sensitivity

var
(TSensi)
var
(ISensi)
var
(µSensi|
sp)
var
(µSensi)

MPa− 2

Correlation between
temporal sensitivity
and vigor
Within-population
correlation between
sensitivity and vigor

r (TVig,
TSensi)

–

r (IVig,
ISensi)

–

− 1

MPa− 2
MPa− 2
MPa− 2

The total variance of average
population vigor over all species
A temporal dynamic variable
quantifying the specific
response of a tree’s growth to
drought stress level
The averaged value of TSensi
over temporal intervals
The average population
sensitivity obtained by
averaging the individual
intrinsic sensitivities
The variance of temporal
sensitivity
The variance of intrinsic
sensitivity
The within-species variance of
average population sensitivity
The total variance of average
population sensitivity over all
species
The Pearson correlation
coefficient between temporal
vigor and temporal sensitivity
The Pearson correlation
coefficient between intrinsic
vigor and intrinsic sensitivity

Development Core Team, 2019).
3. Results
3.1. Within-population variations in growth sensitivity and vigor
Within each species, within-population variance of sensitivity (resp.
vigor) represents on average 520 % (resp. 376 %) of the betweenpopulation variance. Considering all species together, the mean
within-population variance of sensitivity (resp. vigor) represents 47 %
(resp. 17 %) of the between-population variance over all populations
from all species (detailed variances are given in Supp. Table 4). These
results indicate that most of the phenotypic variation in vigor and
sensitivity to drought stress is within populations.
Among the twenty-two populations, the correlation between
intrinsic sensitivity and vigor was significantly positive in ten pop­
ulations at threshold p < 0.05 and in three populations at threshold p <
0.1, which included 7F. sylvatica populations (64 %), 2P. menziesii (67
%), 1P. pinaster (50 %), 2 Q. robur (67 %), and 1 Q. petraea (33 %) (Fig. 2
for P. menziesii and Supp. Fig. 1 for the other species). In these 13 pop­
ulations, individual trees with better vigor showed higher growth
sensitivity to drought stress. No significant negative correlation was
observed. It should be noted that some trees, for the most part the less

(7)

where Y successively corresponds to µSensi, var (ISensi), var (IVig) and r
(IVig, ISensi); β is the intercept; Pr and Tmax are the 1959–1994 average
summer precipitation and maximum temperature, respectively; ESW is
the extractable soil water; age is the average population age in the
selected intervals; sp is the species random cofactor; and ε is the
between-population Y residual. Subscript p denotes the population.
Specifically, for the average population vigor (µVig), we added tree
density (Nha, a proxy for competition; Supp. Table 3) as explanatory
variables since growth is largely dependent on competition level:

μVigp = β + Prp + Tmaxp + ESW p + Nhap + agep + spp + εp

Full Name

(8)

We performed all statistical analyses using R version 3.6.2 (R
5

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

Fig. 2. Correlation between intrinsic sensitivity
(ISensi) and intrinsic vigor (IVig) in the three
P. menziesii populations (Ps.m 34, Ps.m 61 and Ps.
m 69). Each point represents an individual tree.
The correlation was significantly positive in two
of the three populations (Ps.m 61 and Ps.m 69).
The significance level is indicated on the graphs
by ’***’ at p < 0.001, ’**’ at p < 0.01, ’*’ at p <
0.05, ’.’ at p < 0.1 and ’ns’ above. The dotted
lines indicate zero sensitivity. Note that some
trees were insensitive, i.e., ISensi ≤ 0.

vigorous ones, were insensitive to drought stress, i.e., ISensi ≤ 0.
We observed a temporal variation in the variance of sensitivity and
vigor: the temporal variations within populations did not overcome the
largest differences between contrasted populations and did not show a
clear common pattern among populations or species (Fig. 3a,b for
P. menziesii and Supp. Fig. 2 for the other species). The value and sig­
nificance of the correlation coefficients between growth sensitivity
(TSensi) and vigor (TVig) also varied among temporal intervals without a
clear pattern (Fig. 3c). Nevertheless, the correlation was positive for
most populations and intervals (Fig. 3c for P. menziesii and Supp. Fig. 2
for the other species). We found at least one significant positive corre­
lation between temporal sensitivity and vigor within 17 of the 22
selected populations and no significant negative correlation. We
observed this correlation in populations at the juvenile stage (e.g., <15
years in Ps.m 69) as well as in largely mature populations (e.g., >180
years in Q.r 55).

significant effect (Table 2a; Supp. Fig. 3a,b). The overall model had a
marginal R2 value of 0.56. In addition, summer precipitation (Pr; p <
0.001) had a positive effect on within-population variance of sensitivity
(var (ISensi)), while extractable soil water (ESW), maximum summer
temperature (Tmax) and average population age (age) had no significant
effect (Table 2b; Supp. Fig. 3c). The overall model had a marginal R2
value of 0.56. To summarize, the average population value and the
within-population variance of sensitivity to drought stress decreased
with greater water constraints.
Regarding vigor, no factor had a significant effect on either average
population vigor (µVig) or on the within-population variance of vigor
(var (IVig)) (Table 2c,d).
Regarding the sensitivity–vigor correlation, extractable soil water
(ESW; p = 0.012) had a negative effect on the within-population cor­
relation between sensitivity and vigor (r (IVig, ISensi)), while maximum
summer precipitation (Pr), summer temperature (Tmax) and average
population age had no significant effects (Fig. 4; Table 2e). The overall
model had a marginal R2 value of 0.24. These results indicate that
environmental factors were a major determinant of the correlation be­
tween growth sensitivity to drought stress and vigor within populations.

3.2. Effect of environmental conditions of the populations on the
variations in sensitivity and vigor
Over the entire period from 1959 to 1994, the different populations
showed high contrasts in the environmental factors driving water defi­
cits: average summer precipitation (Pr) ranged from 116 to 347 mm,
average summer maximum temperature (Tmax) ranged from 19 to
24 ◦ C, and extractable soil water ranged (ESW) from 19 to 275 mm
(Supp. Table 3). It should be noted that the range of water conditions
varied between species with some overlap: ESW varied significantly
between species unlike Pr and Tmax.
Regarding sensitivity to drought stress, summer precipitation (Pr; p
< 0.001) and extractable soil water (ESW; p = 0.009) had a positive
effect on the average population sensitivity (µSensi), while maximum
summer temperature (Tmax) and average population age (age) had no

4. Discussion
In this study, we quantified the variation and covariation of vigor
and sensitivity to drought, as well as their temporal dynamics, both
within and between 22 populations of five contrasting temperate spe­
cies. We defined two growth variables at the individual tree level as a
framework to disentangle the components of tree growth performance in
environments with varying drought stress levels. We argue that these
two individual growth variables can be considered new tree-ring based
phenotypic traits (Housset et al., 2018).
Our results are based on a subset of the RENECOFOR dataset for
6

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

Table 2
Results of the mixed models on all the selected populations (n = 22 populations)
of average population sensitivity (a), within-population variance of sensitivity
(b), average population vigor (c), within-population variance of vigor (d), and
within-population correlation between sensitivity and vigor (e) according to
average summer precipitation (Pr), average maximum summer temperature
(Tmax), extractable soil water (ESW), species (sp), stand density (Nha) and
average population age (age). Significant results are shown in bold with the
significance level indicated by ’***’ at p < 0.001, ’**’ at p < 0.01, ’*’ at p < 0.05
and ’.’ at p < 0.1.
Source
a) µSensi

(Intercept)
Pr
Tmax
ESW
age
b) var (ISensi)
(Intercept)
Pr
Tmax
ESW
age
c) µVig
(Intercept)
Pr
Tmax
ESW
age
Nha
d) var (IVig)
(Intercept)
Pr
Tmax
ESW
age
e) r (IVig, ISensi)
(Intercept)
Pr
Tmax
ESW
age

Estimate

Chisq.

Df

p-Value

6.14 × 10− 3
2.78 × 10− 5
− 4.65 × 10− 4
1.23 × 10− 5
2.69 × 10− 6

0.95
16.87
2.56
6.73
0.14

1
1
1
1
1

0.329
<0.001***
0.110
0.009**
0.712

− 2.75 × 10− 6
3.50 × 10− 8
− 1.27 × 10− 7
8.33 × 10− 9
− 5.55 × 10− 9

0.16
22.87
0.16
2.58
0.48

1
1
1
1
1

0.687
<0.001***
0.688
0.108
0.488

1.66 × 10− 1
4.35 × 10− 4
1.07 × 10− 2
− 2.00 × 10− 4
− 1.19 × 10− 3
− 5.37 × 10− 5

0.27
1.15
0.49
0.36
3.24
0.36

1
1
1
1
1
1

0.602
0.284
0.483
0.548
0.072
0.550

2.79 × 10− 3
− 1.23 × 10− 5
5.91 × 10− 5
1.24 × 10− 5
3.245 × 10− 6

0.12
2.08
0.03
2.68
0.09

1
1
1
1
1

0.730
0.150
0.871
0.102
0.761

− 0.29 × 10− 1
7.08 × 10− 4
3.36 × 10− 2
− 1.70 × 10− 3
− 3.12 × 10− 4

0.10
0.53
0.64
6.25
0.09

1
1
1
1
1

0.753
0.468
0.422
0.012*
0.766

Fig. 3. Variances (a, b) and correlation (c) of temporal sensitivity (TSensi) and
temporal vigor (TVig) for each interval T of the three P. menziesii populations
(Ps.m 34, Ps.m 61 and Ps.m 69). Each point represents an interval T charac­
terized by the average age of the trees (age). On the graph c, the dashed lines
represent the values beyond which correlation coefficients are significant at p
< 0.05 computed for a sample size of n = 30 individuals.

which growth response to stress was present (selection of populations
and intervals). The pedoclimatic range of all the populations and that of
the selected subset were equivalent. We hypothesized that the pop­
ulations and intervals removed from the analyses experienced insuffi­
cient drought stress to observe a growth response and/or were impacted
by other disturbance factors masking the relationship between growth
and drought stress. Nevertheless, species-specific seasonal growth dy­
namics may also affect the response to drought. First, the formation of
earlywood in ring porous wood species, such as Quercus sp., largely
depends on remobilization from reserves accumulated in previous years
and starts before budburst (Michelot et al., 2012). In these species, tree
rings of similar widths can have very different proportions of latewood
(Lebourgeois, 1999). Therefore, wood density can differ considerably
from year to year, buffering the variation of ring width in response to
environmental conditions over the overall growing period (Schwarz
et al., 2020). In this study, we attribute the small proportion of Quercus
sp. populations selected for analyses (21 % compared to 49 % for other
species) to these physiological and anatomical characteristics and to the
fact that the Quercus sp. populations are preferentially on the best site
conditions in the RENECOFOR network (Lebourgeois, 1999; Mérian
et al., 2011). Second, there may be a certain time lag between the

Fig. 4. Effect of extractable soil water (ESW) on the correlation between
sensitivity and vigor (r (IVig, ISensi)). Each point represents a population. The
correlation increases with lower ESW. The line shown is the simple regression
coefficients on all the selected populations (n = 22): r (IVig, ISensi) = 0.52–1.47
× 10− 3 ESW (R2 = 0.24).
7

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

growth period and the water stress period, e.g., drought in autumn could
deepen the annual water deficit while annual growth would not be
affected. The intra-annual analysis of radial growth can help to define
the growing season over which to integrate the stress (Olivar et al.,
2014). The growing season varies greatly depending on the site and the
species (Michelot et al., 2012). Pine species show active growth in
October and late regrowth until November (P. pinaster, Vieira et al.,
2009; P. halepensis, Olivar et al., 2014). In oak, growth usually stops at
the first events of water deficit, during the months of June-July
(Q. petraea, Bréda & Granier, 1996). For the sake of comparability be­
tween sites and species, we have integrated stress at the scale of the
entire year. Thus, our selection of intervals would exclude autumn
drought events having no impact on the annual growth. However, in the
temperate region, most of the water stress occurs in July and August,
and therefore a moderate impact on the results is expected.

populations with no clear pattern. The temporal variations in withinpopulation variances were sometimes important but did not exceed
the largest between-population differences of average values. Thus,
averaging over temporal intervals, as we did here, provides more robust
estimates of within-population variance of growth-related traits. More­
over, stand age had no effect on either trait (mean population values and
variances), suggesting that we indeed captured an individual effect in­
dependent of cofactors such as tree age or size.
4.2. A growth vigor-sensitivity trade-off within populations facing drought
stress
We observed a positive correlation between vigor and sensitivity to
drought stress within 17 of 22 populations (77 %) in both juvenile and
largely mature stands. Vigorous trees showed higher sensitivity to
drought stress episodes. Conversely, trees with higher sensitivity
showed a higher capacity to benefit from favorable years. These corre­
lations can originate from different and non-mutually exclusive envi­
ronmental and genetic causes.
The observed positive correlation between vigor and sensitivity
could first result from the acclimation of trees to the spatially hetero­
geneous microenvironmental conditions within stands. In microsites
with low available water (e.g., low ESW) and/or high evapotranspira­
tion (e.g., high density of trees, high LAI), individual trees may experi­
ence higher drought stress than expected on average and respond
adaptively through shifts in allocation to foliage, sapwood, and roots at
the expense of vigor. Adaptive responses include short-term reductions
in leaf area through early senescence (Ciais et al., 2005; Bréda et al.,
2006), resource-intensive adaptations in hydraulic architecture and
wood density induced by longer-term growth (Ruiz Diaz Britez et al.,
2014), and lasting global physiological, morphological and architectural
changes (e.g., tree height, number and longevity of stems, leaves and
roots; Nicotra et al., 2010). Conversely, under favorable microsites (e.g.,
higher ESW, better fertility), the accumulation of aboveground biomass
due to growth may increase the sensitivity to drought events, since these
morphological investments in stems and leaves induce substantial
maintenance costs in water and carbohydrates during dry periods
(McDowell et al., 2011; Cailleret et al., 2019). Changes in the hetero­
geneity of stand structure (e.g., LAI, tree crown volume, clumping)
through forest dynamics and silvicultural interventions are expected to
lead to temporal variations in the vigor–sensitivity correlation, as
observed. The pronounced spatial heterogeneity often associated with
shallow soils could lead to a higher correlation between sensitivity and
vigor, as we observed in lower ESW environments (Nourtier et al. 2014).
The vigor–sensitivity correlation could also be of genetic origin,
whereby selection for vigor entails a functional cost in terms of sensi­
tivity and vice versa, potentially resulting in the coexistence of different
genotypes within the population. Stomatal control determines the
reduction in assimilation during water deficit periods. Therefore, ge­
notypes characterized by maximum transpiration and assimilation rates
under favorable conditions, and thus by high vigor, are expected to show
stronger stomatal control during dry episodes, reducing carbon assimi­
lation accordingly (Roussel et al., 2009a,b; Martínez-Vilalta et al.,
2012). Vigor can be associated with a larger leaf area, which implies
more photosynthesis and thus more growth but also more water loss
through evapotranspiration and thus greater sensitivity (Marron et al.,
2003). Lower sensitivity can be associated with increased root devel­
opment, with the allocation of resources to the roots resulting in a
substantial cost in terms of aboveground growth (Aranda et al., 2010).
Wood density, a trait implicated in resistance to cavitation, is related to
slower growth and longer life (Chave et al., 2009). Although universal,
this relationship is not systematically found at the intraspecific level
(Fajardo et al., 2022). The coexistence of different adaptive combina­
tions of growth, phenology and anatomy traits, i.e., trait syndromes, was
observed in a water-stressed population of F. sylvatica (Bontemps et al.,
2017). Here, we observed a weaker correlation between vigor and

4.1. A notable within-population variation in sensitivity and vigor
Our results reveal high levels of within-population phenotypic vari­
ation in growth sensitivity and vigor. On average for all species and for
both traits, the within-population variance was higher than the variance
of population mean values, even though the different populations of
each species were sampled in different geographic areas and different
environmental conditions. This suggests both genetic and environ­
mental contributions to between-population variance. We had no in­
formation on microenvironmental heterogeneity within each population
that could help disentangle the genetic and microenvironmental com­
ponents of within-population variance, but the environmental charac­
terization at the population level provides a clue on this issue, as follows.
The average population sensitivity was mainly driven by two envi­
ronmental factors, summer precipitation and extractable soil water
(ESW). Summer precipitation also had a positive effect on withinpopulation variance in sensitivity. As a parsimonious interpretation,
we can assume that the positive impact of summer precipitation on
within-population variance simply results from a scale effect, thus
contributing to the environmental component of the variance of sensi­
tivity. In contrast, ESW only drove the average population sensitivity but
neither the within-population variance nor the average population
vigor. Thus, ESW is likely to explain part of the between-population
variance that is not a scale effect, whereby lower sensitivity in pop­
ulations of lower ESW effectively indicates a lower response to stress.
Although we cannot properly test for local adaptation based on our
dataset, this cline in sensitivity along the ESW gradient suggests past
adaptation to drought stress regimes. Furthermore, it has been shown
that microgeographic variation in soil conditions within populations
may contribute to interindividual variation in the response to drought
(Nourtier et al., 2014) and there is increasing empirical evidence of
microenvironmental adaptation within forest tree populations (Audi­
geos et al., 2013; Heer et al., 2018; Brousseau et al., 2021). Therefore,
we also hypothesize that part of the within-population variance in
sensitivity, which is higher than between-population variance, is partly
under genetic control.
The average population vigor was not affected by any environmental
factors. In particular, the lack of effect of summer precipitation indicates
that our selection of the most favorable years for computing vigor
effectively excluded water-limiting years. None of the environmental
factors tested showed an effect on the within-population variance in
vigor, indicating in particular that within-population phenotypic vari­
ation in vigor was unrelated to drought conditions.
In this study, we considered temporal variations in growth vigor and
sensitivity to drought during stand development. For growth-related
traits, temporal changes in population means and variances during a
rotation cycle result from dynamic environmental factors (e.g., trends in
climate change), evolution of stand structure, tree age, and long-term
memory of past events (e.g., acclimation). For both studied traits, the
dynamics of within-population variances differed among species and
8

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

sensitivity in higher extractable soil water environments, i.e., lower
drought stress environments, which suggests a low selection pressure on
sensitivity leading to the persistence of genotypes a priori unfavorable,
that is to say not so vigorous but sensitive. The effect of ESW on the
correlation between vigor and sensitivity is also consistent with the lack
of a significant relationship between drought stress and growth for plots
with low stress level. Thus, environmental conditions favoring drought
stress, such as low extractable soil water, might be necessary to reveal
the trade-off between growth sensitivity and vigor.

Such models should consider all demographic performances, i.e., sur­
vival and reproduction in addition to growth, and the potential tradeoffs between them as well as the underlying genetic basis for ques­
tions on a multigenerational scale.
5. Conclusions
We assessed within-population variation and covariation for growth
performances, considered as dynamic phenotypic traits. We focused on
two growth traits: vigor and sensitivity to drought stress. The phenotypic
variation in vigor and growth sensitivity was considerable in all studied
forest tree populations, and we observed a general trade-off between
individual tree vigor and sensitivity to drought. The phenotypic varia­
tion within populations can be related to better resilience and evolv­
ability, whereas the trade-off represents a potential constraint on
adaptation. Overall, the phenotypic variation observed is expected to
influence evolutionary trajectory and forest stand dynamics, forest
management being impacted by and having an impact on this variation.
In particular, selective thinning aimed at favoring fast-growing trees
could indirectly: (i) increase population sensitivity to water stress, (ii)
harm the process of acclimation, and consequently (iii) affect future
growth performance under climate change. Here, management practices
supporting the conservation of both slow-growing and fast-growing
trees within populations could be considered as a possible strategy to
mitigate the negative effects of droughts and increase population
resilience.

4.3. Implications for population adaptation and management under
climate change
Forest dynamics tends to progressively lower the social rank of trees
with lower growth and then, in particular for shade-intolerant species, to
eliminate them through asymmetric competition (Hülsmann et al.,
2018). Both vigor and sensitivity are components of tree growth, and we
can expect different selection intensities for sensitivity and vigor
depending on the local drought regime. When drought is rare or absent,
the selection will operate only on vigor, which is likely to indirectly
induce the selection of sensitive trees through the trade-off or, at least, to
maintain sensitive trees at a dominant social rank. In contrast, the more
intense and/or regular the drought events, the greater the selection will
operate against sensitivity, which is likely to indirectly select for less
vigorous trees. In the context of climate change, we expect such local
shifts in drought regimes through increasingly frequent and severe dry
conditions. Despite the strong interindividual variations observed, a
genetic correlation could restrain the response to selection and
contribute to maintaining within-population genetic variation for both
sensitivity and vigor (Pujol et al., 2018). Regarding the evolution of
forest functions under climate change, selection for lower sensitivity
may correlate with selection for reduced growth potential. Depending
on the underlying genetic determinism, this is likely to lead to changes
in population growth performance over generations.
Forest management modifies the composition, structure, environ­
ment, and therefore evolutionary processes of forest tree populations
(Jactel et al., 2009; Lefèvre et al., 2014). When silvicultural operations
consist of controlling competition by removing trees on the basis of their
phenotype, one issue is that current selection criteria may not neces­
sarily correlate with future adaptedness (Lefèvre, 2012). Indeed, our
results suggest that systematically favoring fast-growing trees could be
unsafe if water conditions deteriorate because this risks indirectly
selecting sensitive trees and, therefore, affects future growth perfor­
mance. Furthermore, choosing the fastest growing trees among those
that remain as seed trees may possibly increase the growth sensitivity in
the following generations depending on the underlying genetic basis.
When silvicultural practices are used to buffer the intensity and there­
fore the impact of drought stress (e.g., reduction in stand density and
LAI, Giuggiola et al., 2013; Schmitt et al., 2020), attention must be given
to avoid over-selection of vigorous and sensitive genotypes and to avoid
too much counter-action of acclimation processes. It is expected that the
later these practices are applied, i.e., at a mature stand stage, the less the
impact on selection for sensitivity will be, since much of the selection
will have already taken place before (Lefèvre et al., 2014). One strategy
could then be to maintain a significant drought stress level in the ju­
venile stage to favor adaptation and acclimation before reducing it
through thinning or pruning. Ideally, this reflection should address
multiple stressors rather than just one, and not just traits associated with
growth. In addition, microsite heterogeneity within populations de­
serves attention in forest management strategies because it provides a
variety of conditions with multiple benefits, in terms of resilience of the
whole population and in terms of within-population genetic diversity
(Scotti et al, 2016; Gauzere et al, 2020).
Only a modeling approach seems to be able to explicitly account for
the complexity of the underlying interactions between demography,
ecology, management and evolution (Oddou-Muratorio et al., 2020).

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation program as part of the B4EST project [grant
number 773383]; and the French National Forests Office. We thank all
the people who worked on setting up and maintaining the RENECOFOR
network, as well as collecting and making their data available. We
would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers who gave their time
to improve the content of this article.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2022.120754.
References
Aitken, S.N., Yeaman, S., Holliday, J.A., Wang, T., Curtis-McLane, S., 2008. Adaptation,
migration or extirpation: climate change outcomes for tree populations. Evol. Appl.
1, 95–111. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-4571.2007.00013.x.
Alfaro, R.I., Fady, B., Vendramin, G.G., Dawson, I.K., Fleming, R.A., Sáenz-Romero, C.,
Lindig-Cisneros, R.A., Murdock, T., Vinceti, B., Navarro, C.M., Skrøppa, T.,
Baldinelli, G., El-Kassaby, Y.A., Loo, J., 2014. The role of forest genetic resources in
responding to biotic and abiotic factors in the context of anthropogenic climate
change. Forest Ecol. Manage., Global Forest Genet. Resour.: Taking Stock 333,
76–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2014.04.006.
Allen, C.D., Breshears, D.D., McDowell, N.G., 2015. On underestimation of global
vulnerability to tree mortality and forest die-off from hotter drought in the
Anthropocene. Ecosphere 6, art129. https://doi.org/10.1890/ES15-00203.1.
Allen, C.D., Macalady, A.K., Chenchouni, H., Bachelet, D., McDowell, N., Vennetier, M.,
Kitzberger, T., Rigling, A., Breshears, D.D., Hogg, E.H. (Ted), Gonzalez, P., Fensham,
R., Zhang, Z., Castro, J., Demidova, N., Lim, J.-H., Allard, G., Running, S.W.,

9

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

Semerci, A., Cobb, N., 2010. A global overview of drought and heat-induced tree
mortality reveals emerging climate change risks for forests. Forest Ecology and
Management 259, 660–684. 10.1016/j.foreco.2009.09.001.
Anderegg, W.R.L., Schwalm, C., Biondi, F., Camarero, J.J., Koch, G., Litvak, M., Ogle, K.,
Shaw, J.D., Shevliakova, E., Williams, A.P., Wolf, A., Ziaco, E., Pacala, S., 2015.
Pervasive drought legacies in forest ecosystems and their implications for carbon
cycle models. Science 349, 528–532. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aab1833.
Aranda, I., Alía, R., Ortega, U., Dantas, Â.K., Majada, J., 2010. Intra-specific variability in
biomass partitioning and carbon isotopic discrimination under moderate drought
stress in seedlings from four Pinus pinaster populations. Tree Genet. Genomes 6,
169–178. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11295-009-0238-5.
Arntz, M.A., Delph, L.F., 2001. Pattern and process: evidence for the evolution of
photosynthetic traits in natural populations. Oecologia 127, 455–467. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s004420100650.
Audigeos, D., Brousseau, L., Traissac, S., Scotti-Saintagne, C., Scotti, I., 2013. Molecular
divergence in tropical tree populations occupying environmental mosaics. J. Evol.
Biol. 26, 529–544. https://doi.org/10.1111/jeb.12069.
Baize, D., Jabiol, B., 1995. Guide pour la description des sols. Quae.
Bansal, S., Harrington, C.A., Gould, P.J., St.Clair, J.B., 2015. Climate-related genetic
variation in drought-resistance of Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii). Global
Change Biology 21, 947–958. 10.1111/gcb.12719.
Becker, M., 1989. The role of climate on present and past vitality of silver fir forests in
the Vosges mountains of northeastern France. Can. J. For. Res. 19, 1110–1117.
https://doi.org/10.1139/x89-168.
Bennett, A.C., McDowell, N.G., Allen, C.D., Anderson-Teixeira, K.J., 2015. Larger trees
suffer most during drought in forests worldwide. Nat. Plants 1, 1–5. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nplants.2015.139.
Bonan, G., 2019. Climate Change and Terrestrial Ecosystem Modeling, 1st ed. Cambridge
University Press. 10.1017/9781107339217.
Bontemps, A., Davi, H., Lefèvre, F., Rozenberg, P., Oddou-Muratorio, S., 2017. How do
functional traits syndromes covary with growth and reproductive performance in a
water-stressed population of Fagus sylvatica? Oikos 126, 1472–1483. https://doi.
org/10.1111/oik.04156.
Bréda, N., Granier, A., 1996. Intra- and interannual variations of transpiration, leaf area
index and radial growth of a sessile oak stand (Quercus petraea). Ann. For. Sci. 53,
521–536. https://doi.org/10.1051/forest:19960232.
Bréda, N., Huc, R., Granier, A., Dreyer, E., 2006. Temperate forest trees and stands under
severe drought: a review of ecophysiological responses, adaptation processes and
long-term consequences. Ann. For. Sci. 63, 625–644. https://doi.org/10.1051/
forest:2006042.
Brodribb, T., Cochard, H., 2009. Hydraulic failure defines the recovery and point of
death in water-stressed conifers. Plant Physiol. 149, 575–584. https://doi.org/
10.1104/pp.108.129783.
Brousseau, L., Fine, P.V.A., Dreyer, E., Vendramin, G.G., Scotti, I., 2021. Genomic and
phenotypic divergence unveil microgeographic adaptation in the Amazonian
hyperdominant tree Eperua falcata Aubl. (Fabaceae). Mol. Ecol. 30, 1136–1154.
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.15595.
Bunn, A.G., 2008. A dendrochronology program library in R (dplR). Dendrochronologia
26, 115–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dendro.2008.01.002.
Burczyk, J., Adams, W.T., Shimizu, J.Y., 1996. Mating patterns and pollen dispersal in a
natural knobcone pine (Pinus attenuate Lemmon.) stand. Heredity 77, 251–260.
https://doi.org/10.1038/hdy.1996.139.
Cailleret, M., Dakos, V., Jansen, S., Robert, E.M.R., Aakala, T., Amoroso, M.M., Antos, J.
A., Bigler, C., Bugmann, H., Caccianaga, M., Camarero, J.-J., Cherubini, P.,
Coyea, M.R., Čufar, K., Das, A.J., Davi, H., Gea-Izquierdo, G., Gillner, S., Haavik, L.J.,
Hartmann, H., Hereş, A.-M., Hultine, K.R., Janda, P., Kane, J.M., Kharuk, V.I.,
Kitzberger, T., Klein, T., Levanic, T., Linares, J.-C., Lombardi, F., Mäkinen, H.,
Mészáros, I., Metsaranta, J.M., Oberhuber, W., Papadopoulos, A., Petritan, A.M.,
Rohner, B., Sangüesa-Barreda, G., Smith, J.M., Stan, A.B., Stojanovic, D.B.,
Suarez, M.-L., Svoboda, M., Trotsiuk, V., Villalba, R., Westwood, A.R., Wyckoff, P.H.,
Martínez-Vilalta, J., 2019. Early-warning signals of individual tree mortality based
on annual radial growth. Front. Plant Sci. 9 https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpls.2018.01964.
Camarero, J.J., Gazol, A., Sangüesa-Barreda, G., Vergarechea, M., Alfaro-Sánchez, R.,
Cattaneo, N., Vicente-Serrano, S.M., 2021. Tree growth is more limited by drought in
rear-edge forests most of the times. Forest Ecosyst. 8, 25. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s40663-021-00303-1.
Campbell, G.S., 1974. A simple method for determining unsaturated conductivity from
moisture retention data. Soil Sci. 117, 311–314. https://doi.org/10.1097/
00010694-197406000-00001.
Carrer, M., 2011. Individualistic and time-varying tree-ring growth to climate sensitivity.
PLoS One 6, e22813. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0022813.
Caspersen, J.P., Vanderwel, M.C., Cole, W.G., Purves, D.W., 2011. How stand
productivity results from size- and competition-dependent growth and mortality.
PLoS One 6, e28660. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0028660.
Chave, J., Coomes, D., Jansen, S., Lewis, S.L., Swenson, N.G., Zanne, A.E., 2009. Towards
a worldwide wood economics spectrum. Ecol. Lett. 12, 351–366. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1461-0248.2009.01285.x.
Choat, B., Jansen, S., Brodribb, T.J., Cochard, H., Delzon, S., Bhaskar, R., Bucci, S.J.,
Feild, T.S., Gleason, S.M., Hacke, U.G., Jacobsen, A.L., Lens, F., Maherali, H.,
Martínez-Vilalta, J., Mayr, S., Mencuccini, M., Mitchell, P.J., Nardini, A.,
Pittermann, J., Pratt, R.B., Sperry, J.S., Westoby, M., Wright, I.J., Zanne, A.E., 2012.
Global convergence in the vulnerability of forests to drought. Nature 491, 752–755.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11688.
Ciais, P.h., Reichstein, M., Viovy, N., Granier, A., Ogée, J., Allard, V., Aubinet, M.,
Buchmann, N., Bernhofer, C., Carrara, A., Chevallier, F., De Noblet, N., Friend, A.D.,

Friedlingstein, P., Grünwald, T., Heinesch, B., Keronen, P., Knohl, A., Krinner, G.,
Loustau, D., Manca, G., Matteucci, G., Miglietta, F., Ourcival, J.M., Papale, D.,
Pilegaard, K., Rambal, S., Seufert, G., Soussana, J.F., Sanz, M.J., Schulze, E.D.,
Vesala, T., Valentini, R., 2005. Europe-wide reduction in primary productivity
caused by the heat and drought in 2003. Nature 437, 529–533. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature03972.
Cook, E.R., 1985. A time series analysis approach to tree-ring standardization. University
of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.US. Ph.D. dissertation).
Cook, E.R., Peters, K., 1981. The Smoothing Spline: A New Approach to Standardizing
Forest Interior Tree-Ring Width Series for Dendroclimatic Studies. Tree-Ring Bull.
41, 45–53.
Corcuera, L., Gil-Pelegrin, E., Notivol, E., 2011. Intraspecific variation in pinus pinaster
PSII photochemical efficiency in response to winter stress and freezing temperatures.
PLoS One 6, e28772.
Cornic, G., Massacci, A., 1996. Leaf Photosynthesis Under Drought Stress. In: Baker, N.R.
(Ed.), Photosynthesis and the Environment, Advances in Photosynthesis and
Respiration. Springer, Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 347–366. https://doi.org/
10.1007/0-306-48135-9_14.
Davi, H., Cailleret, M., 2017. Assessing drought-driven mortality trees with physiological
process-based models. Agric. For. Meteorol. 232, 279–290. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.agrformet.2016.08.019.
Deleuze, C., Pain, O., Dhôte, J.-F., Hervé, J.-C., 2004. A flexible radial increment model
for individual trees in pure even-aged stands. Ann. For. Sci. 61, 327–335. https://
doi.org/10.1051/forest:2004026.
Depardieu, C., Girardin, M.P., Nadeau, S., Lenz, P., Bousquet, J., Isabel, N., 2020.
Adaptive genetic variation to drought in a widely distributed conifer suggests a
potential for increasing forest resilience in a drying climate. New Phytol. 227,
427–439. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.16551.
DeSoto, L., Cailleret, M., Sterck, F., Jansen, S., Kramer, K., Robert, E.M.R., Aakala, T.,
Amoroso, M.M., Bigler, C., Camarero, J.J., Čufar, K., Gea-Izquierdo, G., Gillner, S.,
Haavik, L.J., Hereş, A.-M., Kane, J.M., Kharuk, V.I., Kitzberger, T., Klein, T.,
Levanič, T., Linares, J.C., Mäkinen, H., Oberhuber, W., Papadopoulos, A., Rohner, B.,
Sangüesa-Barreda, G., Stojanovic, D.B., Suárez, M.L., Villalba, R., MartínezVilalta, J., 2020. Low growth resilience to drought is related to future mortality risk
in trees. Nat. Commun. 11, 545. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14300-5.
Dhôte, J., 1991. Modélisation de la croissance des peuplements réguliers de hêtre :
dynamique des hiérarchies sociales et facteurs de production. Ann. For. Sci. 48,
389–416. https://doi.org/10.1051/forest:19910404.
Dhôte, J.-F., Le Moguedec, G., 2012. Fagacées : a tree-centered growth and yield model
for sessils oak (Quercus petraea L.) and common beech (Fagus sylvatica L.). Ann. For.
Sci. 69, 257–269. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13595-011-0157-0.
Dufrêne, E., Davi, H., François, C., le Maire, G., Dantec, V.L., Granier, A., 2005.
Modelling carbon and water cycles in a beech forest. Ecol. Model. 185, 407–436.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2005.01.004.
Durand, Y., Brun, E., Merindol, L., Guyomarc’h, G., Lesaffre, B., Martin, E., 1993. A
meteorological estimation of relevant parameters for snow models. Annals of
Glaciology 18, 65–71. 10.3189/S0260305500011277.
Fajardo, A., Piper, F.I., García-Cervigón, A.I., 2022. The intraspecific relationship
between wood density, vessel diameter and other traits across environmental
gradients. Funct. Ecol. 36, 1585–1598. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.14069.
Fallour-Rubio, D., Guibal, F., Klein, E.K., Bariteau, M., Lefèvre, F., 2009. Rapid changes
in plasticity across generations within an expanding cedar forest. J. Evol. Biol. 22,
553–563. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.2008.01662.x.
Forrester, D.I., 2019. Linking forest growth with stand structure: tree size inequality, tree
growth or resource partitioning and the asymmetry of competition. For. Ecol.
Manage. 447, 139–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2019.05.053.
Fritts, H.C., 1971. Dendroclimatology and dendroecology. Quat. Res. 1, 419–449.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0033-5894(71)90057-3.
Galván, J.D., Camarero, J.J., Gutiérrez, E., 2014. Seeing the trees for the forest: drivers of
individual growth responses to climate in Pinus uncinata mountain forests. J. Ecol.
102, 1244–1257. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2745.12268.
Gauzere, J., Klein, E.K., Brendel, O., Davi, H., Oddou-Muratorio, S., 2020.
Microgeographic adaptation and the effect of pollen flow on the adaptive potential
of a temperate tree species. New Phytol. 227, 641–653. https://doi.org/10.1111/
nph.16537.
Giguère-Croteau, C., Boucher, É., Bergeron, Y., Girardin, M.P., Drobyshev, I., Silva, L.C.
R., Hélie, J.-F., Garneau, M., 2019. North America’s oldest boreal trees are more
efficient water users due to increased [CO 2 ], but do not grow faster. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 116, 2749–2754. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1816686116.
Giuggiola, A., Bugmann, H., Zingg, A., Dobbertin, M., Rigling, A., 2013. Reduction of
stand density increases drought resistance in xeric Scots pine forests. For. Ecol.
Manage. 310, 827–835. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2013.09.030.
Grady, K., Ferrier, S., Kolb, T., Hart, S., Allan, G., Whitham, T., 2011. Genetic variation in
productivity of foundation riparian species at the edge of their distribution:
implications for restoration and assisted migration in a warming climate. Glob.
Chang. Biol. 17, 3724–3735. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2011.02524.x.
Greene, D.F., Johnson, E.A., 1994. Estimating the mean annual seed production of trees.
Ecology 75, 642–647. https://doi.org/10.2307/1941722.
Guillemot, J., Martin-StPaul, N.K., Dufrêne, E., François, C., Soudani, K., Ourcival, J.M.,
Delpierre, N., 2015. The dynamic of the annual carbon allocation to wood in
European tree species is consistent with a combined source–sink limitation of
growth: implications for modelling. Biogeosciences 12, 2773–2790. https://doi.org/
10.5194/bg-12-2773-2015.
Heer, K., Behringer, D., Piermattei, A., Bässler, C., Brandl, R., Fady, B., Jehl, H.,
Liepelt, S., Lorch, S., Piotti, A., Vendramin, G.G., Weller, M., Ziegenhagen, B.,
Büntgen, U., Opgenoorth, L., 2018. Linking dendroecology and association genetics

10

V. Fririon et al.

Forest Ecology and Management 531 (2023) 120754

in natural populations: Stress responses archived in tree rings associate with SNP
genotypes in silver fir (Abies alba Mill.). Mol. Ecol. 27, 1428–1438. https://doi.org/
10.1111/mec.14538.
Housset, J.M., Nadeau, S., Isabel, N., Depardieu, C., Duchesne, I., Lenz, P., Girardin, M.
P., 2018. Tree rings provide a new class of phenotypes for genetic associations that
foster insights into adaptation of conifers to climate change. New Phytol. 218,
630–645. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.14968.
Hülsmann, L., Bugmann, H., Cailleret, M., Brang, P., 2018. How to kill a tree: empirical
mortality models for 18 species and their performance in a dynamic forest model.
Ecol. Appl. 28, 522–540. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.1668.
IGN, 2021. Le Mémento. Inventaire forestier. Édition 2021, Saint-Mandé, Institut
national de l’information géographique et forestière.
Jactel, H., Nicoll, B.C., Branco, M., Gonzalez-Olabarria, J.R., Grodzki, W., Långström, B.,
Moreira, F., Netherer, S., Orazio, C., Piou, D., Santos, H., Schelhaas, M.J., Tojic, K.,
Vodde, F., 2009. The influences of forest stand management on biotic and abiotic
risks of damage. Ann. For. Sci. 66 https://doi.org/10.1051/forest/2009054.
Lebourgeois, F., 1999. Les Chênes sessile et pédonculé (Quercus petraea Liebl. et Quercus
robur L.) dans le réseau Renecofor : rythme de croissance radiale, anatomie du bois,
de l’aubier et de l’écorce. Rev. For. Fr. 522 https://doi.org/10.4267/2042/5460.
Lebourgeois, F., Bréda, N., Ulrich, E., Granier, A., 2005. Climate-tree-growth
relationships of European beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) in the French Permanent Plot
Network (RENECOFOR). Trees 19, 385–401. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00468-0040397-9.
Lebourgeois, F., Rathgeber, C.B.K., Ulrich, E., 2010. Sensitivity of French temperate
coniferous forests to climate variability and extreme events (Abies alba, Picea abies
and Pinus sylvestris). J. Veg. Sci. 21, 364–376. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.16541103.2009.01148.x.
Lebourgeois, F., 1997. RENECOFOR. Etude dendrochronologique des 102 peuplements
du réseau. ONF Office National des Forêts, Département des Recherches Techniques.
Lefèvre, F., Boivin, T., Bontemps, A., Courbet, F., Davi, H., Durand-Gillmann, M.,
Fady, B., Gauzere, J., Gidoin, C., Karam, M.-J., Lalagüe, H., Oddou-Muratorio, S.,
Pichot, C., 2014. Considering evolutionary processes in adaptive forestry. Ann. For.
Sci. 71, 723–739. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13595-013-0272-1.
Lefèvre, F., 2012. Les ressources génétiques, un réservoir et une dynamique pour la
gestion des incertitudes. Rev. For. Fr. 10.4267/2042/48432.
Lempereur, M., Martin-StPaul, N.K., Damesin, C., Joffre, R., Ourcival, J.-M.,
Rocheteau, A., Rambal, S., 2015. Growth duration is a better predictor of stem
increment than carbon supply in a Mediterranean oak forest: implications for
assessing forest productivity under climate change. New Phytol. 207, 579–590.
https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.13400.
Liepe, K.J., 2014. Genetic variation in lodgepole pine and interior spruce: adaptation to
climate and implications for seed transfer. University of Alberta, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada. Ph.D. dissertation).
Lloret, F., Keeling, E.G., Sala, A., 2011. Components of tree resilience: effects of
successive low-growth episodes in old ponderosa pine forests. Oikos 120,
1909–1920. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0706.2011.19372.x.
Lorenz, M., 1995. International co-operative programme on assessment and monitoring
of air pollution effects on forests-ICP forests-. Water Air Soil Pollut. 85, 1221–1226.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00477148.
Ma, Z., Peng, C., Zhu, Q., Chen, H., Yu, G., Li, W., Zhou, X., Wang, W., Zhang, W., 2012.
Regional drought-induced reduction in the biomass carbon sink of Canada’s boreal
forests. PNAS 109, 2423–2427. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1111576109.
Marron, N., Dreyer, E., Boudouresque, E., Delay, D., Petit, J.-M., Delmotte, F.M.,
Brignolas, F., 2003. Impact of successive drought and re-watering cycles on growth
and specific leaf area of two Populus x canadensis (Moench) clones, “Dorskamp” and
“Luisa_Avanzo”. Tree Physiol. 23, 1225–1235. https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/
23.18.1225.
Martínez-Vilalta, J., López, B.C., Loepfe, L., Lloret, F., 2012. Stand- and tree-level
determinants of the drought response of Scots pine radial growth. Oecologia 168,
877–888. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-011-2132-8.
Mašek, J., Tumajer, J., Rydval, M., Lange, J., Treml, V., 2021. Age and size outperform
topographic effects on growth-climate responses of trees in two Central European
coniferous forest types. Dendrochronologia 68, 125845. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dendro.2021.125845.
McDowell, N.G., Beerling, D.J., Breshears, D.D., Fisher, R.A., Raffa, K.F., Stitt, M., 2011.
The interdependence of mechanisms underlying climate-driven vegetation mortality.
Trends Ecol. Evol. 26, 523–532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2011.06.003.
Mérian, P., Bontemps, J.-D., Bergès, L., Lebourgeois, F., 2011. Spatial variation and
temporal instability in climate-growth relationships of sessile oak (Quercus petraea
[Matt.] Liebl.) under temperate conditions. Plant Ecol. 212, 1855–1871. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11258-011-9959-2.
Mérian, P., Lebourgeois, F., 2011. Size-mediated climate–growth relationships in
temperate forests: a multi-species analysis. For. Ecol. Manage. 261, 1382–1391.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2011.01.019.
Michelot, A., Simard, S., Rathgeber, C., Dufrêne, E., Damesin, C., 2012. Comparing the
intra-annual wood formation of three European species (Fagus sylvatica, Quercus
petraea and Pinus sylvestris) as related to leaf phenology and non-structural
carbohydrate dynamics. Tree Physiol. 32, 1033–1045. https://doi.org/10.1093/
treephys/tps052.
Najar, M., 1999. Un nouveau modèle de croissance pour le pin maritime. InformationsForêt 579, 6.

Nicotra, A.B., Atkin, O.K., Bonser, S.P., Davidson, A.M., Finnegan, E.J., Mathesius, U.,
Poot, P., Purugganan, M.D., Richards, C.L., Valladares, F., van Kleunen, M., 2010.
Plant phenotypic plasticity in a changing climate. Trends Plant Sci. 15, 684–692.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2010.09.008.
Nourtier, M., Chanzy, A., Cailleret, M., Yingge, X., Huc, R., Davi, H., 2014. Transpiration
of silver Fir (Abies alba mill.) during and after drought in relation to soil properties
in a Mediterranean mountain area. Ann. For. Sci. 71, 683–695. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s13595-012-0229-9.
Oddou-Muratorio, S., Davi, H., Lefèvre, F., 2020. Integrating evolutionary, demographic
and ecophysiological processes to predict the adaptive dynamics of forest tree
populations under global change. Tree Genet. Genomes 16, 67. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11295-020-01451-1.
Olivar, J., Bogino, S., Rathgeber, C., Bonnesoeur, V., Bravo, F., 2014. Thinning has a
positive effect on growth dynamics and growth–climate relationships in Aleppo pine
(Pinus halepensis) trees of different crown classes. Ann. For. Sci. 71, 395–404.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13595-013-0348-y.
Palmer, W.C., 1965. Meteorological Drought. Weather Bureau Research Paper No. 45.
Washington, DC: US Department of Commerce.
Peltier, D.M.P., Ogle, K., 2020. Tree growth sensitivity to climate is temporally variable.
Ecol. Lett. 23, 1561–1572. https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.13575.
Perin, J., Claessens, H., Lejeune, P., Brostaux, Y., Hébert, J., 2017. Distance-independent
tree basal area growth models for Norway spruce, Douglas-fir and Japanese larch in
Southern Belgium. Eur. J. Forest Res. 136, 193–204. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10342-016-1019-y.
Pujol, B., Blanchet, S., Charmantier, A., Danchin, E., Facon, B., Marrot, P., Roux, F.,
Scotti, I., Teplitsky, C., Thomson, C.E., Winney, I., 2018. The missing response to
selection in the wild. Trends Ecol. Evol. 33, 337–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tree.2018.02.007.
R Development Core Team, 2019. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.
R-project.org/.
Rehfeldt, G.E., Wykoff, W.R., Ying, C.C., 2001. Physiologic plasticity, evolution, and
impacts of a changing climate on Pinus Contorta. Clim. Change 50, 355–376.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010614216256.
Rehfeldt, G.E., Tchebakova, N.M., Parfenova, Y.I., Wykoff, W.R., Kuzmina, N.A.,
Milyutin, L.I., 2002. Intraspecific responses to climate in Pinus sylvestris. Glob.
Change Biol. 8, 912–929. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2486.2002.00516.x.
Roussel, M., Dreyer, E., Montpied, P., Le-Provost, G., Guehl, J.-M., Brendel, O., 2009a.
The diversity of 13C isotope discrimination in a Quercus robur full-sib family is
associated with differences in intrinsic water use efficiency, transpiration efficiency,
and stomatal conductance. J. Exp. Bot. 60, 2419–2431. https://doi.org/10.1093/
jxb/erp100.
Roussel, M., Thiec, D., Montpied, P., Ningre, N., Guehl, J.-M., Brendel, O., 2009b.
Diversity of water use efficiency among Quercus robur genotypes: contribution of
related leaf traits. Ann. For. Sci. 66, 408–408. 10.1051/forest/2009010.
Ruiz Diaz Britez, M., Sergent, A.-S., Martinez Meier, A., Bréda, N., Rozenberg, P., 2014.
Wood density proxies of adaptive traits linked with resistance to drought in Douglas
fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirb.) Franco). Trees 28, 1289–1304. 10.1007/s00468014-1003-4.
Schmitt, A., Trouvé, R., Seynave, I., Lebourgeois, F., 2020. Decreasing stand density
favors resistance, resilience, and recovery of Quercus petraea trees to a severe
drought, particularly on dry sites. Ann. For. Sci. 77, 52. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13595-020-00959-9.
Schwarz, J., Skiadaresis, G., Kohler, M., Kunz, J., Schnabel, F., Vitali, V., Bauhus, J.,
2020. Quantifying growth responses of trees to drought—a critique of commonly
used resilience indices and recommendations for future studies. Curr. Forestry Rep.
6, 185–200. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40725-020-00119-2.
Scotti, I., González-Martínez, S.C., Budde, K.B., Lalagüe, H., 2016. Fifty years of genetic
studies: what to make of the large amounts of variation found within populations?
Ann. For. Sci. 73, 69–75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13595-015-0471-z.
Trouvé, R., Bontemps, J.-D., Collet, C., Seynave, I., Lebourgeois, F., 2014. Growth
partitioning in forest stands is affected by stand density and summer drought in
sessile oak and Douglas-fir. Forest Ecol. Manage. 334, 358–368. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.foreco.2014.09.020.
Van Loon, A.F., Stahl, K., Di Baldassarre, G., Clark, J., Rangecroft, S., Wanders, N.,
Gleeson, T., Van Dijk, A.I.J.M., Tallaksen, L.M., Hannaford, J., Uijlenhoet, R.,
Teuling, A.J., Hannah, D.M., Sheffield, J., Svoboda, M., Verbeiren, B., Wagener, T.,
Van Lanen, H.A.J., 2016. Drought in a human-modified world: reframing drought
definitions, understanding, and analysis approaches. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 20,
3631–3650. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-20-3631-2016.
Vicente-Serrano, S.M., Beguería, S., López-Moreno, J.I., 2010. A multiscalar drought
index sensitive to global warming: the standardized precipitation evapotranspiration
index. J. Clim. 23, 1696–1718. https://doi.org/10.1175/2009JCLI2909.1.
Vidal, J.-P., Martin, E., Franchistéguy, L., Baillon, M., Soubeyroux, J.-M., 2010. A 50-year
high-resolution atmospheric reanalysis over France with the Safran system. Int. J.
Climatol. 30, 1627–1644. https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.2003.
Vieira, J., Campelo, F., Nabais, C., 2009. Age-dependent responses of tree-ring growth
and intra-annual density fluctuations of Pinus pinaster to Mediterranean climate.
Trees 23, 257–265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00468-008-0273-0.
Zang, C.S., Buras, A., Esquivel-Muelbert, A., Jump, A.S., Rigling, A., Rammig, A., 2020.
Standardized drought indices in ecological research: Why one size does not fit all.
Glob. Change Biol. 26, 322–324. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14809.

11

